An H100 holds 80 GB.
Training a 2 trillion parameter model
needs 32 TB of GPU memory just for its
weights, gradients, and optimizer
states.
400 GPUs before any computation starts.
The compute itself is 4.8 * 10 to the 26
floating point operations. That requires
tens of thousands of chips running in
parallel.
Which means they have to talk constantly
across a network about 18 times slower
than the links inside a single server.
The numbers they exchange are floating
point. Fewer bits means faster compute
and less memory. Too few and gradients
overflow the range or round to zero and
training stops converging.
And over months of continuous running,
something in the cluster fails every few
hours.
>> [music]
>> Training has to keep going.
This is the full stack.
We'll dive deep into each of its layers
in this video.
Training a 2 trillion parameter model
runs into three constraints, starting
with memory.
The model is a list of 2 trillion
numbers called parameters. During
training, each parameter has five
entries in memory.
A 2 bytes working copy,
a 2 bytes gradient that says how to
nudge it,
and three 4 bytes buffers Adam the
optimizer keeps. A high precision backup
plus the running mean and variance of
the gradient.
16 bytes per parameter, 32 TB overall.
An H100 holds 80 GB, so 400 of them are
needed just to hold the model state.
Activations are next. The values flowing
between layers as data moves forward. We
cache them because the backward pass
reads them to compute gradients. They
scale with batch size and sequence
length, not parameter count. One
training example at sequence length 4096
produces 642 GB.
A batch of 32 multiplies that to 20 TB,
comparable to the model state.
Then compute. A 2 trillion model needs
roughly 4.8 * 10 to the 26 floating
[music] point operations. A single H100,
even at half its theoretical peak, would
need [music] 30,700 years.
Even 16,384
GPUs together would take nearly 2 years.
Copy the model onto every GPU. Split the
batch into N shards and let each GPU
process its shard independently.
That's data parallelism, the simplest
approach.
After backpropagation, every GPU holds
different gradients that must be
averaged. Funnelling everything to one
machine would create a bottleneck that
defeats the purpose.
Ring all reduce solves it.
An all reduce is an operation where
every GPU ends up holding the sum, or in
this case the average of every other
GPU's data without any central
bottleneck.
Ring all reduce splits the work into two
halves,
reduce scatter and all gather.
Arrange N GPUs in a logical ring and
split each gradient tensor into N
chunks. At every step, each GPU works on
a different chunk. They all send and
receive simultaneously, so no link is
idle.
Over N minus one steps, every GPU sends
one chunk right and accumulates from the
left until each one holds a fully
reduced chunk.
At this point, each GPU owns exactly one
fully reduced chunk, but a different
chunk. The all gather phase then
circulates those chunks around the ring,
so every GPU ends up with all N, the
complete averaged gradient.
Total communication per GPU is 2 * N - 1
over N times the gradient size, which
approaches twice the gradient size as N
grows.
That's bandwidth optimal and independent
of GPU count.
In practice, each layer's all reduce
overlaps with earlier layers backward
compute, hiding communication under work
the GPU had to do anyway.
Data parallelism scales batch size with
GPU count. So, 16,000 GPUs means batches
so large extra samples stop sharpening
the gradient estimate and large batch
updates start overshooting. Lamb, a
layer-wise adaptive variant of Adam,
pushed BERT to batch size 32,868,
compressing 3 days into 76 minutes.
Beyond a critical [music] batch size
though, doubling the batch saves fewer
than half the gradient steps.
The deeper issue is memory. Every GPU
stores a complete copy of the model. For
2 trillion parameters, that's 32 TB
replicated on every single GPU.
32 TB of model state copied identically
on every GPU. That's standard data
parallelism.
If thousands of GPUs are training the
same model, why does each of them keep a
full copy?
Microsoft's DeepSpeed team answered with
ZeRO, the zero redundancy optimizer.
Instead of replicating the state, ZeRO
partitions it across the GPUs. Each one
keeps just its share and pulls in what
it needs when it needs it.
The clever part is that different pieces
of the state can be partitioned at
different costs.
Stage one partitions the optimizer
states, the biggest piece, 12 of the 16
bytes per parameter. Memory per GPU
drops by roughly four times at scale and
communication doesn't go up at all.
The all reduce that data parallelism
already does is exactly what's needed to
update the partition states, free.
Stage two also partitions the gradients.
Memory drops further, roughly eight
times in total at scale. Still no extra
communication, still free.
Stage three is where you pay. It
partitions the parameters themselves, so
no GPU holds a complete model. For 2
trillion parameters on 2048 GPUs, that's
16 GB per GPU, well inside an H100's 80
GB budget.
But before any layer can run, the GPUs
all gather its weights, assemble a
temporary full copy, compute the layer,
and discard the copy. Communication
climbs to 1.5 [music]
times the baseline.
No single GPU ever holds the full model
at any moment. ZeRO solves the model
state problem.
Activations, the cached layer outputs
that are comparable to the model state,
are still untouched.
At batch size 32, activations for our 2
trillion parameter model reach 20 TB,
comparable to the model state itself.
Even that figure already assumes the
cheap attention pieces are dropped and
recomputed rather than stored.
The general tool is gradient
checkpointing. During the forward pass,
most activations are discarded. During
backward, they get recomputed from saved
checkpoints.
That buys memory at a cost of roughly
33% extra compute.
Not every activation is equal.
Inside each transformer layer, the
attention internals, softmax outputs,
and dropout masks form a sequence by
sequence matrix that grows with the
square of the sequence length. That
dominates memory.
But re-deriving them is cheap. A small
matrix multiply plus a softmax, a tiny
slice of layer compute.
The inputs to the heavy linear layers
are the opposite, smaller in memory but
expensive to recreate because doing so
means re-running the heavy matrix
multiplies themselves.
Selective checkpointing keeps the small
but expensive linear layer inputs and
throws away the big but cheap attention
internals.
Compared to full recomputation,
activation memory drops fivefold, FLOPs
rise just 2.7%
and model FLOPs utilization, or MFU,
climbs from 42.1 to 54.2%.
There's another memory wall we haven't
tackled and it scales quadratically.
Standard self-attention builds the full
N by N attention matrix, where N is the
sequence length. At 4096 tokens, that's
16 million entries per head. At 131K
tokens, 17 billion.
The matrix sits in GPU high bandwidth
memory, or HBM, which on an H100 moves
about 3 TB per second. On-chip SRAM is
roughly 100 times faster, but only tens
of megabytes.
Flash attention, from Dao and
colleagues, tiles attention into blocks
small enough to live in SRAM.
As each block is processed, it tracks a
running maximum and a running
denominator. When the next block arrives
with a larger maximum, Flash attention
multiplies the prior partial sum by a
correction factor before adding the new
terms.
The factor is the exponential of the old
maximum minus the new one because
softmax itself is built on exponentials.
So, the softmax stays numerically exact
across tiles. The full matrix is never
materialized.
Memory drops from order N squared to
order N, wall clock time improves by two
to four times, and the floating point
count is unchanged.
Because it's design centers on memory
bandwidth, Flash attention is now the
default for long sequence training and
makes context parallelism practical.
ZeRO solved the storage problem.
No GPU keeps the whole model, but each
individual matrix multiply still runs on
a single GPU. Gather that layer's
weights, compute, discard.
Tensor parallelism splits the
multiplication itself. Each GPU does a
slice of the matrix multiply and they
stitch the answer back together at the
end.
That stitching is a blocking handoff.
Every GPU has to wait for it before
moving on. Four of those per layer,
every layer.
So, tensor parallelism only works on the
fastest link in the cluster.
Inside one layer, the MLP runs two big
matrix multiplies back to back with a
small per number operation in between.
The trick is to slice the first matrix
vertically and the second matrix
horizontally.
Cut that way, the seams line up. Each
GPU's piece of the first multiply
produces exactly the piece of the
intermediate result that its piece of
the second multiply expects.
No data crosses between GPUs in the
middle. One handoff at the very end sums
the partial answers into the right
output.
Attention splits even more naturally. It
already runs as independent heads in
parallel. With T GPUs, each takes its
share of the heads, then one handoff
combines them.
Two handoffs per forward pass, two more
on the way back, all blocking. Whichever
link those handoffs run over decides the
ceiling.
Inside one server, eight GPUs wired
together, NVLink moves 900 GB/s.
Across servers, InfiniBand drops to 50.
That 18-fold cliff is why Llama 3 pins
tensor parallelism at exactly eight, one
server, no slow link.
One last waste. After the stitching,
every GPU has the same full output.
The next few operations are per token
math. Normalize each token's features,
occasionally zero one out, add the
original input back in. None of them mix
tokens together.
So, every GPU does the same work on the
same bytes. Pure duplication.
Sequence parallelism splits that work
along the token dimension.
Each GPU only does its share of the
tokens. The total bytes moved between
GPUs stay the same, just rearranged into
a scatter and a gather around the per
token math.
Activation memory drops by a factor of
T.
Llama 3 has 126 transformer layers,
close to around 128.
To keep the math clean, picture that 128
baseline split evenly across 16 GPUs,
eight per GPU.
Layers 1 through 8 on GPU 1, layers 9
through 16 on GPU 2, and so on.
A forward pass flows through them in
sequence. [music]
While GPU 1 computes, GPUs 2 through 16
sit idle, waiting for input. At any
instant, one GPU works and 15 wait.
That collective idle time is called the
bubble.
The fix is to split the input batch into
smaller microbatches. As soon as GPU 1
finishes microbatch 1, it picks up
microbatch 2, while GPU 2 starts on
microbatch 1.
Multiple GPUs run in parallel on
different data.
The bubble fraction works out to P minus
1 over M plus P minus 1, where P is
stages and M is microbatches in flight.
Pushing it below 1% at 16 stages needs
1,600 microbatches, which memory cannot
hold.
One F1B short for one forward, one
backward alternates the two after
warm-up. Activations free the instant
backward consumes them. Only P stay in
flight, not M.
Same bubble ratio, far less memory.
Interleaved scheduling cuts each GPU's
chunk into smaller pieces. GPU 1 now
owns layers 1, 33, 65, and 97, spread
across the model. Bubble shrinks 4x,
communication rises 4x.
Llama 3 added one more trick. The first
GPU also runs the word embedding lookup.
The last GPU runs the output projection.
Both are extra work on the boundary
stages.
Llama 3 trims those two to seven layers
each, leaving the middle 14 at eight.
126 total, every GPU finishes at the
same instant.
6.5% better MFU, 5 GB less peak memory.
The newest fix splits the backward pass
itself.
Backward computes two things, the input
gradient, which the previous stage needs
immediately, and the weight gradient,
which only matters at the end of the
step.
The weight gradient has no downstream
dependency, so it can be slotted into
the idle bubble slots instead of leaving
them empty.
23% more throughput.
Flash attention makes a 131K token
sequence tractable inside one GPU.
A million tokens is beyond what fits on
a single device.
Context parallelism solves this by
splitting the sequence itself across
GPUs using an algorithm called ring
attention.
Arrange GPUs in a logical ring,
each holding a chunk of query tokens.
The key value blocks rotate around the
ring, one hop at a time.
Every GPU computes partial attention
against whichever KV block it currently
holds, then passes that block to the
next neighbor. The transfer overlaps
with computation. [music]
The next block arrives while the current
one is being consumed.
After one full rotation, every query has
seen every key, and the causal mask,
which keeps each token from attending to
future ones, zeros out the rest,
producing exact attention.
Llama 3 used this to prefill 1 million
tokens with the
across 128
H100s
at 93% parallelization efficiency.
No dense model with 2 trillion
parameters has ever been trained.
Switch Transformer at 1.6 trillion,
GPT-4 rumored at 1.8 trillion, DeepSeek
[music] V3 at 671 billion, all mixture
of experts.
A router picks each token's top K
experts from a larger pool, giving
massive capacity with only fractional
compute per token.
Distributing experts across GPUs creates
two problems.
The first is communication.
Every MoE layer fires two all-to-all
collectives, where every GPU exchanges
data directly with every other, unlike
all reduce, which sums contributions
into one shared result.
A dispatch sends tokens to their
assigned experts GPU. A combine returns
the outputs.
The second is load balancing. If the
router favors a few popular experts,
those GPUs bottleneck while others idle.
The standard fix is an auxiliary loss
that penalizes uneven routing.
Switch Transformer used alpha of 10 to
the negative two, pushing routers toward
uniform distribution.
That loss pulls against the router's
learned preferences, though, and can
degrade quality.
DeepSeek V3
They add a bias to each expert's routing
score, raised for underloaded experts
and lowered for overloaded ones. The
bias only shifts which experts get
selected.
It never enters the gating values that
weight the chosen experts outputs, so
gradients flow cleanly.
Across the 14.8 trillion token training
run, they saw no auxiliary loss, no
dropped tokens, and no loss spikes.
The last major choice is numerical
precision. How many bits we use to store
each weight.
Every weight is a floating point number,
sign, mantissa, exponent, like
scientific notation. The exponent sets
the range, the mantissa sets the
precision.
FP16 spends five of its 16 bits as on
the exponent, capping its largest value
at 65,504.
Training gradients often blow past that,
overflow to infinity, and the run
breaks.
Loss scaling pulls gradients down by a
constant before the update, then scales
them back. But if that constant drifts
out of range, training diverges.
BF16 reallocates the same 16 bits, eight
for the exponent, seven for the
mantissa.
That restores FP32's full range, from 10
to the minus 38 up to 10 to the 38.
>> [music]
>> Every gradient fits, and loss scaling
The cost is three mantissa bits. For
training stability, range matters far
more than precision, so BF16 is the
default.
Halving the bits again gives FP8, one
byte per weight. H100 tensor cores run
FP8 [music] matrix multiplications at
twice the rate of BF16.
But eight bits is tight, only 256
representable values.
DeepSeek V3 [music] made FP8 training
work with tile-wise scaling. Weights
split into 128 by 128 blocks,
activations into 1 by 128 tiles, one per
token.
Each tile gets its own scale factor,
refreshed every step, so its eight-bit
window matches local magnitudes. Matrix
multiplies accumulate partial sums in
FP32, so rounding doesn't pile up.
Loss stayed within 0.25% of a full BF16
baseline.
Microsoft's FP8 LM reproduced the gains
at GPT 175B scale, 39% less memory, 75%
faster training.
Next comes FP4 on Nvidia's Blackwell.
Four bits, 16 values for the whole
number line.
Keeping training stable at that
resolution is still an open problem, but
early block scale results track FP8
closely.
Total GPUs is the product of five
parallelism dimensions.
Tensor, pipeline, context, expert,
[music] and data.
Llama 3 and DeepSeek V3 chose different
values for nearly every one.
Llama 3 405B runs on 16,384
H100 GPUs. Tensor parallelism is eight,
filling one node over NVLink at 900
GB/s.
Pipeline parallelism is 16, spanning
node groups over InfiniBand. The rest is
128-way data parallelism with optimizer
state, gradients, and weights sharded
across all 128 GPUs.
8 * 16 * 128
= 16,384.
The cluster delivers 400 teraflops per
GPU at 41% utilization.
For long context training at 131,000
tokens, context parallelism shards each
sequence along its length.
It jumps to 16, while data parallelism
drops to eight.
Same GPU count, sequence is 16 times
longer.
DeepSeek V3 is different. 671
billion parameters total, 37 billion
active per [music] token. 256 experts.
It runs on 2,048 H800 [music]
GPUs.
Pipeline parallelism is 16, expert
parallelism 64, no tensor parallelism at
all.
The H800's NVLink runs at 400 GB/s,
less than half the H100's, making tensor
parallelism too expensive on the
critical path.
>> [music]
>> DeepSeek's dual pipe schedule overlaps
expert routing with forward and backward
compute, hiding communication under
useful work. 2.788 million GPU hours,
5.6 million dollars.
Roughly 11 times fewer GPU hours than
Llama 3 at comparable benchmark quality.
Two valid design choices, each shaped by
the hardware the team had to work with.
That 4.8 * 10 to the 26 figure comes
from one formula.
C = 6 ND.
Parameters * tokens * 6.
The six is the matmul cost. Two
operations per parameter for the forward
pass, plus four more for the backward
pass.
The token count comes from Chinchilla,
DeepMind's compute-optimal rule of 20
tokens per parameter, which pushes a two
trillion parameter model to 40 trillion
tokens.
Multiply through, and at 50% utilization
on $2 per hour H100's, the bill lands
near $750 million per training run.
No team has paid that bill.
Llama 3 at 405 billion parameters is a
large open weight dense model, roughly a
fifth of two trillion.
DeepSeek V3 took the mixture of experts
path instead.
671 billion parameters of total
capacity, only 37 billion active per
token, an 18 to one sparsity ratio.
Its full training bill came in around
$5.6 million,
roughly 130 times less.
Zero tensor parallelism, pipeline
parallelism, and mixed precision all
remain necessary.
Mixture of experts is what brings
trillion parameter training within
reach.
At 16,384
GPUs running for months, hardware
failures are constant.
During Llama 3's 54-day training run,
Meta logged 419 unexpected failures,
about one every three hours.
GPU and NVLink accounted for 30%, HBM
memory for 17%, and network plus
software issues covered the rest.
The primary defense is recovery
checkpointing.
The full training state is saved on a
schedule, so work can resume from the
latest save after a failure.
A full checkpoint of Llama 3's 405
billion parameters runs about 6.5
terabytes. So, modern systems tier these
rights. In-memory snapshots every five
minutes,
local SSD checkpoints every 30, and
durable remote storage every few hours.
The recovery pipeline is largely
automated. Anomaly detection pauses the
affected tasks. Diagnostics identify the
fault. The orchestrator swaps in a hot
spare, and training resumes from the
latest checkpoint.
Only three of the 419 incidents required
significant human intervention, yielding
over 90% effective training time.
Software can fail, too. Google's PaLM
540B saw roughly 20 loss spikes, meaning
sudden large jumps in training loss.
The standard fix was to restart from a
checkpoint 100 steps before each spike,
and skip the offending data batches.
Every technique we've covered is a piece
of one overall system. Here is how they
fit together.
The data corpus comes first. Before any
GPU trains, 40 trillion tokens must
exist as tokens on disk.
A petabyte of web, books, code, math,
and curated sources is cleaned,
deduplicated, and run through a
tokenizer, leaving about 160 terabytes
of integer tokens on a parallel file
system.
Meta's Tectonic sits under the Llama 3
cluster. 240 petabytes of storage, 2
terabytes per second of aggregate
bandwidth.
The mix matters.
Roughly half the corpus is general web,
a quarter is math and reasoning, about a
sixth is code, and the last bit is
multilingual and curated.
The order matters, too. Most of training
runs at an 8,000 token context.
A long context ramp then stretches that
window to 128,000
tokens in six stages.
And a final cooldown pass decays the
learning rate to zero while up-weighting
the highest quality sources.
Each GPU pulls a deterministic slice of
the corpus, [music]
indexed by step and rank. No two GPUs
see the same token. And a resumed run
reproduces the same batches exactly.
A CPU-side prefetch queue keeps the next
batches ready.
Aggregate bandwidth is trivial, a few
kilobytes per GPU.
The real enemy is tail latency. One slow
node stalls all 16,000 others at the
next collective.
The training step itself runs every
parallelism dimension at once.
16,000 GPUs split into 128 data parallel
replicas,
each one 128 GPUs, combining tensor
parallelism over NVLink with pipeline
parallelism over InfiniBand.
Every layer is flash attention, mixture
of experts routing, and mixed precision
math.
Backward pass uses zero bubble
pipelines, and the optimizer step is
sharded across replicas.
Above it all sits the control plane.
A cluster scheduler launches every
process. A parallelism mesh assigns each
GPU its slot.
An asynchronous checkpoint or snapshot
state every few minutes to memory, every
half hour to SSD, and every few hours to
long-term storage.
A health demon watches for stragglers
and faults. When a node dies, the
orchestrator swaps in a hot spare, and
resumes from the latest checkpoint.
Run all of this for three months.
Three developments are reshaping the
stack.
One is hardware-aware code design.
DeepSeek V3 proved that tailoring
parallelism to specific hardware, like
avoiding tensor parallelism on the
H800's lower bandwidth NVLink,
achieves frontier results at a fraction
of the cost.
Another is Nvidia's GB200 NVL72.
72 Blackwell GPUs sit in a single rack,
linked by NVLink 5 with 1,800 GB/s per
GPU.
13.5 terabytes of GPU memory, and 130
terabytes per second of aggregate
bandwidth.
The tensor parallelism ceiling that
shaped every system we discussed jumps
from eight to 72. So, pipeline
parallelism within a rack may become
unnecessary for sub-trillion models.
The third is D-LoCo.
Workers run a local optimizer for
hundreds of steps on their own shard,
then pull their parameter deltas through
an outer gradient update, communicating
500 times less while staying
synchronized.
Nvidia demonstrated 96% scaling
efficiency across two data centers 1,000
km apart.
Several pieces of this stack didn't
exist [music] five years ago. By the
next frontier model, several more will
be different.